# Overview

## What is Luthier?

Luthier is a tool for instrumenting AMD GPU code objects. For now, it supports dynamic instrumentation, allowing a
tool writer to:

- View and analyze the instructions and basic blocks in a kernel.
- Insert (multiple) calls to "hooks" inside the code between instructions, written with HIP as device functions.
- Remove/modify/add instructions of the original app.
- Query/modify the ISA visible state on the device side, and recording them on a piece of memory allocated by the tool.

We plan to expand Luthier's capabilities to also include other use cases like static instrumentation; But for now,
dynamic instrumentation is our top priority.

## What AMD GPU Applications Luthier Supports?

Luthier supports any AMD GPU programming API in Linux that is built on the
[ROCm runtime (ROCr)](https://github.com/RadeonOpenCompute/ROCR-Runtime/).
This should include both frequently used runtimes like HIP, OpenMP, OpenCL, and even less popular ones, like
AMDGPU.jl.

Luthier does not support the [Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL)](https://github.com/GPUOpen-Drivers/pal) or Mesa-based
backends yet, and does not get tested on Windows.

## How does Luthier work?



## How does Luthier differ from NVBit and GTPin?

Luthier works similarly to [NVBit](https://github.com/NVlabs/NVBit) and
[GTPin](https://software.intel.com/sites/landingpage/gtpin/index.html), but with a few key differences in its design
and abstractions to work with AMD GPUs. Primary differences/similarities include:
1. Luthier directly uses the LLVM infrastructure to do its heavy lifting; This includes everything between disassembling
   and generating the final code object that gets loaded onto the device.
2. Unlike NVBit, Luthier does not modify the loaded code object on the device to insert trampoline; Instead, it opts
   to generate new code objects from scratch and loads them instead, while making sure the newly loaded code objects 
   links to the originally loaded code object.
3. Unlike NVBit, but similar to GTPin, Luthier uses JIT compilation for instrumentation.
4. Similar to GTPin, Luthier uses LLVM Machine IR to describe its register constraints to the LLVM CodeGen pipeline. 
   NVBit, on the other hand, works by figuring out the number of registers in use by the function, and spills them to 
   the local memory regardless.
5. Luthier tools are programmed in a similar fashion to NVBit/GTPin tools, as in  GTPin allows injection of device functions, but 