# The HSA Namespace

[Heterogeneous Systems Architecture (HSA)](https://hsafoundation.com/) implementation of AMD, which is found
under the [ROCr](https://github.com/ROCm/ROCR-Runtime/), is primarily used by Luthier to capture and query the state of
a ROCm application, and to carry out instrumentation. Due to its importance, the `luthier::hsa` namespace
encapsulates any internal Luthier operations or concepts that originate from HSA. More specifically, `luthier::hsa`:

1. Contains C++ classes and APIs that wrap those explicitly defined by the [HSA](https://hsafoundation.com/) API, e.g.
   the `hsa_executable_t`, or `hsa_executable_symbol_t`. Each wrapper class expose useful HSA-related or
   non-related operations very frequently used internally by Luthier.
2. Wraps concepts or objects that are not defined by HSA but HSA is directly responsible for their creation; The primary
   example of this is the `hsa::Instr` class, which encapsulates an `llvm::MCInst` disassembled from
   the content of a function-type `hsa_executable_symbol_t`, which itself is backed by an `hsa_loaded_code_object_t`,
   which itself is backed by an `hsa_executable_t`.
3. Contains C++ classes that do not wrap the HSA API, but are used to implement the wrapper classes and APIs on top of
   it. The primary example is the `hsa::Interceptor` class, which is in charge of intercepting crucial HSA API calls and
   events and providing callbacks for each one of them.

The `hsa` namespace:

1. Tackles the complexity of using HSA in Luthier by abstracting it away in easier to manage wrappers. The HSA API is in
   C, and is too verbose to use in C++ for tasks commonly used in Luthier. Additionally, using HSA APIs internally in
   Luthier requires calls to retrieve the original HSA API table, which can drive up the line count of the project very
   fast.
2. Enforces correct usage and correctness of HSA operations across Luthier. The HSA standard contains many deprecated 
   APIs that are not actively maintained by AMD. The `hsa` namespace only contains the bare minimum, and contains the
   non-deprecated APIs of HSA. In cases where the HSA API itself is not sufficient or might contain bugs that require 
   waiting to be fixed by AMD, the abstraction can supplement these shortcomings, while remaining transparent to the 
   rest of the components.
3. Adds features that are not part of the HSA standard, but require to be present for Luthier. The main example of this
   is device functions as a kind of `hsa_executable_symbol_t`, which Luthier tries to implement internally.

## HSA Interceptor


## How Packets Are 